As we begin this second tape, let's go back to the Rudder years and some of those important changes.
How did the coming of women affect your department's courses and the way you all taught them and so forth?
Well, our teacher education courses or professional courses, it didn't really affect those.
because there wasn't any content in there that would be objectable in a mixed class.
But of course, in our activity program, we didn't have dressing facilities for women.
So we used the visiting team's dressing room.
for women to take a shower and so forth.
And then we used a storage place across the hall where they'd keep their things.
So when the basketball team come in, the lockers would be empty.
And that worked pretty good.
And of course, then we
had to build showers and so forth for women.
Now, did you have male and female students in the same class?
In the same classes?
Yes.
Activity classes also?
Activity classes.
And did the women, in terms of taking advanced courses and majors, did you all see an influx of them pretty quickly?
Yes, we did.
And then, of course, we divided the department because then they had separate certification in health education, so we put that in a separate category.
And then a lot of women in that.
And from that we had developed in the community health program.
And we had a lot of, still have a lot of majors in that program.
And so we had a lot of women.
We have more women in the department now, I think, majoring than we probably have men.
All right.
So you, and you took over as department head about the time that women began to be admitted fully.
without restriction.
Yes.
Did the total number of majors begin to increase rapidly?
Of course, the university was rapidly increasing.
Right.
As I think I mentioned, we went from, what, 11,000 to 31,000 while I was department head.
So the whole student body was increasing so fast.
Do you remember yourself hearing any of the news when Mr. Rutter was sick in the early 1970, his illness and his death?
Do you remember hearing any sudden report of that?
I don't, myself.
I don't.
I remember that, yes, he'd had a kidney and a heart problem, and he was in the hospital.
Yes.
But I don't remember being stunned.
Oh, my.
It didn't seem that sudden.
But I sure wasn't aware that he was sickly.
And if I'm not mistaken, he died one month before his 60th birthday.
I think that's about right.
Most people were not aware of that.
Let's see.
Let's jump back to a national event.
Okay.
Where were you and what was your reaction when you heard the news of the Kennedy assassination?
I was down at the department.
And we had a radio in the...
kind of back in one section of the office, and they heard it on the radio.
Of course, and everybody, you know, gathered around the radio.
But I was down at the department.
I was teaching a 12-to-1 class, and I was going to hurry over with Garland Bayless to eat lunch at the MSC, and we were going to try to beat the students.
And I went into his office and he was listening to the radio and I couldn't figure out why he was listening to the radio when there was something else.
And then he grabbed me and I heard Walter Cronkite say, I've just been handed a bulletin, President Kennedy is dead.
And I remember how that kind of stunned all of us.
Back to A&M events, do you remember any of your first impressions of Jack Williams?
Yes.
My first contact with Jack Williams was not real present.
I don't remember what it was, but it wasn't.
I know the one thing that, see, in the department, we had to have the outdoor pool and the indoor pool had to be self-supporting.
When they had built the outdoor pool,
Art Adamson was Mr. Swim, and he didn't want an outdoor pool, so he wouldn't have anything to do with it.
They went ahead and built it anyway, and the contractor was an A&M graduate, or the architect was, but he had never built a pool before, and it was one big mess.
The first thing, you know, Art didn't have anything to do with it, and nobody from our department had anything to do with building the first pool.
And as soon as they filled it full of water, the water turned milky colored.
They had painted it with a paint that you didn't use in a pool.
And they had a Dalmatious Earth filter.
And the filter, that spurted stuff out into the pool.
They had to empty the pool, scrape all the paint off, and do it right.
And the diving board.
We had a diving board, we had a three-meter board, and a ten-meter platform.
And they were built on a pole-like thing.
And you get on a 10-meter deal, and you can swing that thing back and forth three feet.
You can just sway it back and forth.
Well, you couldn't dive off that.
You know, you get somebody killed.
And you crawled up through a little tube to get to it.
And we had to, I was trying to save money to take those things down, get a new filter system in, because I had to pay for it out of operating funds.
And I took a vacation to Canada.
Our son graduated from A&M.
And we took the family up there at the Lake of the Woods.
And while I was there, I got a message that Mr. Mamaliga had called.
And Jack Williams had been driving down the street.
His wife had said, wouldn't that look nice to have some
pool furniture out there.
So they took money out of that account and bought pool side of furniture.
And I was saying before, and it didn't last a month, you know, they bought country club furniture for Aggie pool.
And so we didn't start off very well.
You know, my impression wasn't, but I think he did a good job at the university, but I was not, he was not one of my favorite people.
Oh, I see, I see.
Any other, as you look back during your days here, other key administrators that we haven't mentioned, and what role did they play?
Deans, vice presidents,
Presidents?
Well, we mentioned T.O.
Walton, of course, was president for a long, long time.
And then we had Williams and Bolton and so forth in there.
I can't remember much of what Morgan did.
Harrington had a positive impact on him, I think.
I can't remember a specific thing, but I think overall my impression was that he did a good job.
And my impression of Miller, until he made that goof on the, you know, didn't shake hands with the girl, and I could see why they would replace him.
I think he was doing a good job.
And I think most of them have done pretty well.
Did you have any, you didn't have any formal interaction with board members, did you?
No.
Well, with Peoples, I had some.
I got to know him.
And I got to know him through Penny.
Oh, okay.
Share any recollection you have?
It was just, you know, just casual meetings and so forth, but not any reaction.
If there were, if we could bring back some faculty members from other departments, are there any that you'd like to be able to thank?
for their role in A&M's progress?
Well, I'd like to thank Walter Warble.
Is that what you mean?
Yes.
I'd like to thank him.
What did he?
He was psychology.
Oh, yes, but why?
Oh, just for the general things that he, the authority he contributed.
Did he have a nickname?
I don't remember one for him.
I don't.
He had to because he was around too long and had too many classes.
I don't remember what it was.
I guess I had a nickname too, but I don't remember it.
I didn't.
I've not heard one for you.
Let's see.
I'm sure there are.
English, math, chemistry.
And biology.
Dr. Gravett.
In chemistry, I can't think of one in chemistry, but Dr. Gravett, and there's another person in biology that I can't recall.
Now, wasn't Dr. Gravett a key advisor also to students?
In medicine, who were going to be medical.
That's what I thought.
Doctors.
And Dr. Potter.
Now, he taught... Biology.
Biology, yes, yes.
What about, are there any former students that have a special place in your recollections?
Yes, there are several.
Go ahead and tell about them.
Well, one was a football player.
Came to A&M as a freshman, and at that time, freshmen were not eligible to play on the varsity, had a freshman team.
He came to me about the third or fourth week of school and says, Dr. Landis, he says, my English teacher was right.
I can't pass A&M.
He says, I'm leaving, going home.
And he says, she told me all through when I was talking about A&M, she says, you can't pass at A&M.
And I think she's right.
And I says, called her my name, I said, now you can pass courses at A&M, and you're going to pass courses at A&M.
We're going to set a time, and every, on this date, at this time, every week, you're going to bring me in what you've done the week before.
We did that.
He went on, he got a PhD.
How good, how good.
Would you like to share his name?
He's deceased.
Oh.
And he was a, he would become a multimillionaire over in, I'll give you his name, he would become multimillionaire over in East Texas.
And they would send out gifts to,
to their customers, you know, to the better customer.
And he would give me one every year, but he would, he and his wife would drive over here.
Oh, my.
Over a 200 mile round trip.
To give it to me in person.
Oh, that's special.
His name was Billy Tidballa.
Oh, Billy, yes, yes.
Now, during your era, the athletes had a wide variety of majors.
Yes.
Many people think that all athletes major in physical education.
They still have a wide variety of majors.
Yes, yes.
Were there, as far as you know, were there certain courses that athletes and other students thought were really, really tough courses?
Were there some courses that supposedly were the big stumbling blocks?
Well, I had a course in test and measurements that they thought was pretty tough.
Okay.
And you know, we got a freedom calculator.
And we sit there and marveled.
That thing would spin and what it would do.
Five things at one time.
And I think the progress has been made, you know.
Let's see.
Let's jump to the Bear Bryant days.
because surely you became acquainted with him.
Do you remember your first acquaintance with him?
My first time to meet him was we had Carl Tischler and Bryant, and so I just had coffee over at the MSC.
We sat down at the table and we had coffee together.
His relationship, our relationship was very good.
Now, you know, when he came, he had more power than the president before.
He could have snapped his fingers and the president would have been gone.
But if he wanted to use a facility of ours, he would send somebody over and say, may we use it?
Now, for example, we had the main basketball court.
That was our part.
And if it was raining or something, he wanted to work indoors, he would send over and ask if he could use it.
But he would always do that.
He never failed.
What about his attitude about the class attendance and grades and so forth?
Yes.
I never had him ask me.
I've only had one coach, and that was not in football, to ask me to change the grade of a student.
Just one.
In my years, I never had any, any... That's the only time I've been asked.
Now, some of my colleagues in history, because Bryant predates, he was gone before I got here, said that Jerry Claiborne,
would come over to chat with them about how certain students were doing so that he could do some encouraging of the students.
And they said that they noticed that quite often during the conversation, Coach Claiborne would pull out his watch with his Phi Beta Kappa key hanging onto it and would ask them a question and then put it back in.
Oh, is that right?
And they thought that it was not by accident that he wanted them to know that he was a Phi Beta Kappa member.
Well now, we did have this situation.
It just relates to our, we had a freshman student who was supposed to be a good quarterback.
His first semester grades was F, F, F, A, F, F, F. And the A was in a junior level course over in a different college from ours entirely.
Oh, my goodness.
And I don't think he could even spell the name of the course.
But he did get an A. But this guy was a real gung-ho supporter of athletics and everything.
You'd know if I called his name, but I won't do it.
Let's see.
You started officiating college football games when?
In 1948.
48.
And at what level?
Headlinesman.
Did you start doing Southwest Conference in 48?
Oh, in college games I started before then, like schools like Sam Houston and so forth, yes.
Really?
But you started doing Southwest Conference in 48?
Southwest Conference in 48.
So you did that from 48 till when?
And my last game was the Cotton Bowl of 1972.
72.
72, yeah, that's right.
And you started out as a Headlinesman.
Started out as a Headlinesman.
And I have always quoted you many, many times.
I asked you many, many years ago, what was the secret to good officiating?
And my memory has you saying, call them fast and walk away tough.
Is that anywhere close to correct?
I think that's right.
Share some memories of officiating, some games and incidents.
Well, I was very fortunate.
I got to, see, then I changed to referee.
I was in a game at SMU, SMU and Illinois, and the referee got sick.
So they moved me to referee for that game.
And then I refereed all the games after that.
I never had really had any problems with a coach.
I did in the cotton ball game one time with a trainer or equipment man.
I was a headlinesman then.
That was in 65.
And that was the Nebraska-Arkansas game, most colorful game I've ever seen.
Beautiful day, everybody red and white, everybody turned out.
And when I'd run by him, he would just let me have it.
And I stopped and I said, Coach, you get him over on the bench and keep him there or it's going to cost you 15 yards.
And boy, he was on the bench after that.
And so then I had a game, a high school game.
I was working a playoff game.
Odessa and somebody.
And the coach from the visiting school had a real bad reputation.
And at halftime, he come out and grabbed my arm.
And I told him, I said, let go of that arm.
He was asking me something.
I said, let go of that arm.
If I have to tell you again, it's going to cost you 15 yards.
He turned loose of it.
And you know that?
He had me and he worked his games a lot of times.
And then I had that in a college game over at Sam Houston.
But I stuck that guy 15 yards.
He didn't turn loose.
But I never really had any problems.
All right, what are some joyful moments that you remember from officiating?
Well, I remember it was the people you work with, and the games were pleasant to work.
I will tell you, I got applauded one time.
I was working a homecoming game.
Penn State was playing TCU, and it was in the fourth quarter.
The score was about 60-0 or 60-7 in favor of Penn State.
I was a referee.
And I made the ball ready for play, and I walked back toward the huddle, and I saw this little chipmunk sitting right up on the line of scrimmage.
So I stopped the game.
Well, the first thing I heard, I heard the kids squealing.
I heard the kids squealing.
That's not the usual noise.
I said, there's something wrong.
So I looked around, and I saw the little chipmunk.
And so I stopped the game.
We got him off the field.
So that's the time I got applauded.
Let's see.
Did you ever work any games with Doak Walker?
Yes, when he played.
And Bobby Lane.
Bobby Lane.
Yeah.
My, my.
Who were, as you look back, who were the coaches that you most respected based on
what you saw and heard of.
I'd have to put Darryl Royal at number one.
Why?
I'm not disagreeing with that.
Because he was always a gentleman.
And his teams were so well disciplined.
They didn't have many fouls.
They scrimmaged with officials.
And so they called the fouls, and I made a mistake in one of his games.
It cost him a touchdown.
And the next game I had him in the next week.
And he says, Carl, he says, and in the meantime, I had been sent three copies of the film.
And I called a man in motion, but he really went laterally, which was legal.
But I thought he went, and I called him in motion and called the touchdown back.
And he said, Carl, he says, I think you missed one in the last game.
I think the man started, you know, called him by name, said, was a letter motion.
I said, Coach, you're exactly right.
I looked at the film, and you're exactly right.
I missed it.
But that's all was said.
All right, others than Coach Royal.
And... What about Mr. Neely?
Mr. Yes, I never had any problems.
I really never had much contact with Mr. Neely.
Oh, yeah.
And who?
No, I was just wondering about.
Oh, Arkansas' coach.
Broyles?
Broyles, yeah.
He was always very nice.
And... Matty Bell.
Matty Bell.
Dutch Meyer.
Yes.
I worked games with, they played, but I never had much contact with them.
Now, you could not work a game with A&M, but could work any other Southwest Conference team game, and then inter-conference games, non-conference games, again, not A&M, but any other school in the conference.
They didn't send the referees as much, and see, most of my time I was a referee, and they don't send the referees as much as they do the field judges and the umpires.
They kind of keep the referees home, but I've been, you know, different places.
All right, and when you were doing that, were you doing it almost every, a game every week?
Pretty close to it.
eight or seven, eight or nine a year.
All right, back in our old schedule when we had Saturday classes here.
Yes.
How did you work that in with your officiating?
I don't remember that we had Saturday classes when I became a conference official.
Okay, all right.
Now, did you normally get to the location of the conference game on Friday afternoon?
Yes.
You were there to spend the night.
And if possible, I took my wife with me.
Because I assume that in many cases you went by automobile before airplanes.
Yes, or train.
Oh, I forgot.
Sure, sure.
I went to Little Rock to work a game in Arkansas and somebody in Little Rock.
I took a train.
You and Barney Welch worked that game of the century, didn't you?
Yes.
Share any memories about that one.
Well, I think the, the thing I think that caught my attention mostly was I was so surprised when Arkansas passed and it was intercepted.
That really caught me of a surprise because I thought, sure, I had it worked out.
He was going to run a play, kick a field goal.
That was going to be it.
But the pass was intercepted.
And then, of course, there was that pass on the sideline that Shorty Lawson called.
And when I got back to the airport in Dallas, somebody said to me, he says, Carl, I said, there sure was a lot of controversy on that call.
And I didn't know anything about it, of course, from the day of the game.
But Cliff Spiegel was the Commissioner of Officials.
And he sent me three films.
On all of them, it showed that the ball was clearly in the receiver's hand.
One of them, it showed the receiver's toe, and his toe was bent.
So his toe was in contact with the grip, the ball was in the receiver's hands, the pass was complete.
So Shorty called it, correct, and it was a hundredth of a second.
So... Did Coach Broyles...
He didn't complain, did he?
No.
Oh, yeah.
There's another thing.
In a Rice-Baylor game, it was the last game of the season.
Rice and Baylor were playing for last place.
And it was a miserable day, cold and raining, and the players would say, Mr. Referee, don't stop the clock.
Don't stop the clock.
And so...
Do you remember any game that was almost the extreme of your experience in score?
You mentioned one that was 60-something.
Do you remember any that was worse than that?
I think the final score, that was 70-something to 14 or something like that.
So that's about as bad?
That's about as bad as I've had.
And what were some that you remember that are decided at the last instant?
You must remember a few that last play.
Yeah, really, as an official, I forgot the plays almost after the next play, I didn't try to remember the last play.
And another thing I didn't do, we'd have a meeting of the conference officials and coaches before the season started.
Then they'd go out and play golf.
I didn't do that.
I didn't want to be your old buddies and so forth riding on the same car with you, and next week stick your, you know, 15 yards.
Yeah, yeah.
Because, you know, then you see, yeah, here, Carl, while we were on a golf course together.
I didn't want that.
Your mic just fell out of its holder.
I think it'll still pick up, but let's see.
Now let's bounce back to...
living here near the campus the folks who lived on the campus faculty members they begin up that that little holder fell there the folks that lived on the campus began to move off the campus in the 50s
There were some that started moving off before we got here.
Right.
Now, did most of the faculty that moved off campus live here?
Y'all called it Southside?
Yes.
Most of the houses that moved off the campus were moved to Southside.
There's still some over on Fairview.
Yes, I remember.
Williams, after he retired as president, he lived in one.
The Colonel Anderson, Frank Anderson, they lived in a home that had been moved off the campus.
Several on that street.
Then there's some on out a little further.
Now, who were your closest neighbors here?
faculty and staff folks.
Next door was Manning Price Entomology.
Across the street was Gaddis Mechanical Engineering.
Across the street was Randolph Entomology.
And there was Ward in Ag Economics.
And then Spike White, who was in ... See, when we built our house, when we first talked about it, there wasn't a street here.
And our back fence was the City Limits for College Station.
My, my, my.
Was this part of a development?
Yes.
Who were?
Clark, who was the head of the Department of Economics.
Oh, he was one of the developers.
He was the developer.
Do you remember what the price was for the lot?
Yes, $1,200 for two.
We got two lots for $1,200.
But when we built the house, we had a septic tank.
We didn't wear it on a sewer line.
Was there city water?
Yes.
Oh, yes.
City water and electricity.
But we had to have a sippy tank.
And so that almost all of your neighbors were employed on the campus.
All of them.
And you, when you all were going to really buy groceries, where did you all drive?
Went to Southside.
Did you do your heavy grocery shopping there?
Yes.
Oh, okay.
That was before really the supermarkets came in.
Then after the supermarkets came in, the first supermarket that came in that I remember right was one in downtown Bryan.
The first one that had Piggly Wiggly, weren't they?
The first one that had the, where everybody walked around and got what they wanted.
Right.
When we got here in 59, Ores on Texas Avenue, about halfway from here to Bryan, was where we went.
You see, that was country.
Right.
I tell people that in the 50s, there was plenty of open space between Bryan and College Station.
and to drive all the way to Bryan seemed to us a comparatively long distance.
Yeah, particularly during the war, you allowed three gallons of gasoline.
Right, right.
A week.
Let's see.
I want to go back.
I hope we didn't skip it, but we might have.
Did you serve on any of the committees or anything that did any, made any recommendations about co-education or non-compulsory core or racial integration?
Did you, do you remember?
I didn't serve on any committees that focused on those problems, no, those questions.
Do you remember any faculty or staff opposition to any of those changes?
No.
I think it was very acceptable to the people that I was around.
As far as I knew, there was not much.
And last week, the death of Bill Moore, I shared with a number of people my belief that, yes, he did deserve a lot of credit for being a positive person.